# Chess

This application is a command-line interface (CLI) Chess game developed in C programming language. It allows two players to play a standard game of chess following official FIDE rules. The program handles board initialization, player turns, move validation, game state tracking, and win/draw conditions. The game runs entirely in the terminal and relies on structured programming concepts such as functions, structs, and arrays.

---

## Students
1. **Name:** [Adham Hamdy Mohamed Mohamed](https://github.com/AdhamHamdy14)
   **ID:** 2410094
2. **Name:** [Anas Alaa Abdo](https://github.com/AnasAlaa11)
   **ID:** 24010004

*Computer and Systems Department, Faculty of Engineering, Alexandria University.*

---

## 1.Technologies Used

Built With
* **C Language:** Core logic and memory management.
* **GCC:** Compiler.
* **Make:** Build automation tool.
* **Standard I/O:** Console-based user interface.

## 2.Features Provided
*	**Two-player turn-based game:** The game supports two players, and they take turns.
*	**Visuals:** A clean board and pieces interface using ANSI escape codes for colors and formatting.
*	**Command-line interface:** All inputs are text-based.
*	**Move validation:** The game has full move validation logic for all pieces.
*	**Move history tracking:** There is a log of moves made during the game that can save up to 300 moves, allowing you to undo or redo moves.
*	**Special moves:** The game contains special moves such as castling, en passant, and pawn promotion.
*	**State detection:** Real time checking for **Check**, **Checkmate**, **Stalemate**, **Dead position**, and **75-move rule.**
*	**50-move rule:** If the last `50` moves by each player have been completed without the movement of any pawn and without any capture, any player can ask for a draw.
* **75-move rule:** If the last `75` moves by each player have been completed without the movement of any pawn and without any capture, a draw will happen automatically.
*	**Save & Load option:** The game can be saved or loaded using a FEN formatted file.

## 3.Environment and Platform
**Windows API**
The inclusion of `<windows.h>` allows the use of SetConsoleOutputCP for rendering.
The design is compatible with the terminal that supports UTF-8 glyphs.

## 4. Project Structure
The project is organized into a modular structure to separate the game logic, rendering, and file management.

```text
.
├── src/                                # Source files (.c)
│   ├── kingCheckments/
│   │               ├── checkmate.c
│   │               └── validMove.c
│   ├── mainFunctions/
│   │             ├── board.c
│   │             ├── choice.c
│   │             ├── main.c
│   │             ├── saveLoad.c
│   │             └── undoRedo.c
│   └── movements/
│              ├── bishopMovements.c
│              ├── kingMovements.c
│              ├── knightMovements.c
│              ├── pawnsMovements.c
│              ├── queenMovements.c
│              └── rooksMovements.c
├── include/                            # Header files (.h)
├── binary/                             # Executable file
├── obj/                                # Compiled object files (generated by Makefile)
├── Makefile                            # Build automation script
└── README.md                           # Project documentation

---

## User manual
### 1.How to compile and run the game?
* **Using GCC:**
    ```bash
    gcc src/*.c src/*/*.c -o chess
    ./chess
    ```

*	**Using Makefile:**
    ```bash
    make
    make run
    ```

### 2.How to delete object and binary directories?
*	**Using Makefile:**
    ```bash
    make clean
    ```

### 3.How to deal with Inputs?
* **Main Menu:**	At the beginning of the game, type the number of the option you want.
    *	Type `1` to start a new game.
    *	Type `2` to load an existing game FEN file.
    *	Type `3` to quit the game.

*	**In-Game Commands:** At any time, you can use the in-game menu commands shown at the beginning of the game (commands are case-sensitive)
    *	Type `undo` to undo the opponent’s last move.
    *	Type `redo` to redo your last undone move.
    *	Type `save` to save the current game status into a FEN file.
    *	Type `draw` to end the game with a draw in case the halfmove clock rule is achieved.
    *	Type `quit` to quit the game.

>**Note:** You cannot use in-game menu commands when you are asked for the promotion of a pawn.

* **Movements:**	Input format for movements should be like: `a2 a4`.
In this case, the piece in square `a2` will be moved to square `a4` if permitted.

* **Promotion:**	If you are eligible to promote a pawn, you will be asked to type the first letter of the piece you want to promote, e.g., (`Q`/`R`/`N`/`B`). (Input is case-sensitive)

*	Players take turns entering moves.

### 4.Game End
The game ends when **checkmate**, **draw**, or **exit** occurs.

## License
This project was developed for educational purposes as part of the curriculum at Alexandria University, Faculty of Engineering. All rights reserved by the authors.
